III

MARCosMATEU-MESTRE

MA
FRAMED
PRSPETIY

TECHNICAL DRAWINGFOR.SHADwsvouMEAND CHARACTERS
IMK-00J-21OBABOVBD-+35J-eBVbHICMOAEF-LS                                 I鈪?         II   IIII

銇?涔?澹?
SoW鈶?

Copyright 鈼?016 Design Studio Press.All Rights Reserved.
All text and artwork in this book are copyright 鈼?016
Marcos Mateu-Mestre.No parts of this book may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical,including photocopying,xerography, and videography recording without written permission from the   publisher,Design Studio Press.
Copy Editors:Melissa Kent,Scott Robertson,Heather Dennis
Graphic Design:Marcos Mateu-Mestre,
Alyssa Homan,
Christopher J.De La Rosa

Published by Design Studio Press
Website:www.designstudiopress.com E-mail:info@designstudiopress.com
Printed in China |First Edition,September 2016 10987654321
Library of Congress Control Number 2016949361 ISBN:978-162465032-1

JECHNICAL  DRAWNG  FOR  SHADOWS,VOLUME  AND  CHARACTERS

designstucioig

To Alfie and Arianna

Special thanks to:
Joan Mateu
Margalida Mestre Carme Mateu
Thanks to models:
Toni Czechorosky   Jonathan Footman Ronald Velasquez

Foreword 	06
Introduction 	007
Chapter 01:Shadows on Objects 	009
Chapter  02:Characters  in  Perspective	037
Chapter  03:Shadows  on  Characters 	067
Chapter 04:Clothing the Characters 	102

Chapter  05:Rendering:Thought  Process  &Execution	15
Chapter 06:Notes on  Composition	123

FOREWORD

Building  on  the  wonderful  instruction  Marcos  shared  with  us  in  Framed  Perspective  Vol.1,we  are  all  ready to be inspired and educated once again with Framed Perspective Vol.2.This book came about as we were working with Marcos on the Framed Perspectivetitle and it became apparent that he had simply too much great information to limit to just one book.After reviewing the complete content in detail and observing the special expertise Marcos brings to drawing figures so well in perspective,we determined this dificult subject(along with shadows and rendering volumes)would best be communicated in a second book.
As you have learned in Vol.1,everything you observe in the natural world is seen in perspective.The more abstract perspective construction techniques of cast shadows are integral to acquire to add to your perspective drawings.Mastering these skillsis one of the most important elements to add to your work to make the volumes feel more realistic.Just as perspective drawing can become a large asset and second nature,so too can the ability to implement cast shadows add value to your work.
Marcos excels at such a beautiful,skilful application of value to his drawings that I can't help but want to do the same with my own drawings each time I read this book.I hope you feel the same way and find many years of inspiration and education to improve your own work forevermore.Finally,I'd like to offer a huge thanks to Marcos for the time and effort he has relentlessly put into the completion of Framed Perspective Vol.2 for us all o enjoy.

Scc+Keber+on
Author of How To Draw,How To Render Founder of Design Studio Press
Los Angeles August 2016

INTRODUCTION
One  of  the  wonderful  things  about  visual  storytelling  is  the  potential  integration  of  everything  and anything ever imaginable in the course of a story,from everyday life in any given part of the planet to the  most outlandish  (literally)science fiction story.An essential  part of this  process,in  most  cases,are the characters.To have the kind of control over the technique that willallow us to tell stories effectively, we will need to know how to work with them from any point of view and how to integrate them in the environments in which the action develops.It is also a fact that besides the spatial relationship between the two,a common lighting and the deriving shadows willtighten the net that will make our image or succession of images the credible fabric we need.
Framed Perspective 2 is targeting all these aspects so that it can offer a solid base to the visual storyteller on which to build his or her work.These are basic elements that,in my case and thanks tomy art-oriented family,I became acquainted with since a very early age.From here my eternal gratitude to them.

涓€       A
MATEU
-2016

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路007

008

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 009

AWW,鈥?PLEASE,
THIS        FLASHLIGHT
THING   IS   sO
DISTRACTING,
D    YOU   MIND?

ALRIGHT.
click                   OFF    IT

THANKS!
TRYING    TO
EXPLAIN
SOMETHING
HERE..
010Shadows on Objects

Toworkwith shadows,three things are needed:1-a light source,  2-an object totally or partially exposed to the  light,and 3-the suface on which the shadow of the object is projected
Regarding light sources,usually it is either a local one,in most cases positioned a reasonable distance from the object exposed 鍔?ss light,like a light bulb or a lit candle,or the sun itself,some 150.000,000 kilometers(a little over 93,000,000 miles)away.
The way to work with these two cases is a bit different,but right mow lets start with a local source.Ready?

Fig.1.1:Here are the three necessary elements:a streetlight,a stick exposed to its light,and a ground plane.
Draw a straight line from point Ato B(that is,the points of contact with the ground of both the streetlight and the stick)and keep drawing past the base of the stick.Note:if instead of a streetlight the light source was a lamp hanging from the ceiling,just project the point of the light source straight down to the ground plane to find point A.
Line A-B indicates the direction in which to draw the shadow.The question is where should this shadow line end?

鈶ｃ€乫ig.1.3

Figs.1.3-1.7  :Here are 5 identical cards on a flat perspective grid.In each case,the light source has been positioned differently to appreciate that the mechanics always work as explained on the previous page.
Observe  a  phenomenon  that  no  matter  where  the  light  is coming from,the top edge of the card and its projected shadow on  the  ground  plane  are  always  parallel  to  each  other.Go ahead and try this at home by moving a light around a solid object with straight sides.

fig. 1.6

fig.1.5

fig.1.4

鐢?

fig.1.7

012路Shadows on Objects

fig.1.8

鐢?

Fig.1.8:  In this case there is an opening on the card.Project the  vertical sides of the opening down to the ground plane,creating  points 1B and 2B,and treat the opening as a doorall the way to the floor,rather than a window.Draw guidelines from the foot of  the light source,through points  1B and 2B,and  beyond.Then project lines from the light source through points 1A and 2A until  they intersect those guidelines.The shadow has been cast on  the floor with the opening in its proper perspective.

澶?

鈶?1A

杩?2A

涓€
2B

1B              鏀?

Fig.1.9:The farther away thelight source is from the object,the less sharp the edges of the shadow will be.

fig.1.9

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre路013

Fig.1.10:To find the exact shadow for this letter E,the key element is the vertical line A1-A2 that crosses it from top to bottom.First, draw a line that goes from the base of the light source to pointA3. Then,find the intersections between this vertical and all horizontals in the letter E,here indicated by little circles.Next,simply project those points onto line A2-A3 by drawing guidelines from the light source through them,to the ground plane.

Fig.1.11:  Here is a similar example,this time including diagonals with the letter Z.

fig.1.10

6
A3

A1

A2

fig.1.11

Q 涓€

	A1

A3	
J	

Q
A2
Fig.1.12:   To find the cast shadow of a triangle,the key is to simply draw a straight  line from the  base  of the  light  source  through point  A2(which  is  the  vertical  projection  of  A1)and  beyond,so that another line can be drawn from the light source itself,through pointA1,until it meets the line on the ground plane atA3.Finally, connect points Jand K to A3 to complete the cast shadow.

014路Shadows on Objects

Fig.1.14:  Defining and drawing the projected shape of the round hole in the wall is done by first finding the square that contains the  circle.Note  this  light  shape  on  the  ground  defined  by  the shape of the window in the vertical plane is not an ellipse on the ground plane defined by the scene's perspective grid due to the

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos   Mateu-Mestre 路 015

fig.1.15                                                                                                               1           fig.1.16

What about casting shadows on inclined planes?
Fig.1.15:    Here  is  a  ramp  with  a  vertical  stick(2-B)right  at  its base.Now  imagine there  is  no  ramp.Draw  a  line  from  the foot of the light source to the base of the stick(dotted line A-B)and extend  it  beyond  the  end  of the  ramp,creating  point  C.Project point  C  vertically  upward  to  create  point  D.Then  draw  a  line connecting points D and B.On this line B-D is where the stick's shadow  will  all.Basically  the  section  in  stripes  represents  the actual shadow,if it was cutting the ramp vertically.

Fig.1.16:  To find the end of the shadow,draw a line from the light source to the top of the stick untilit touches line B-Don the inclined  plane.Job  done.
Fig.  1.17:Interestingly,if    observed    from    above,the    shadow direction looks exactly the same with or without the ramp.
Fig.1.18-1.19:   The same procedure applies even when moving the  light  source  around.

fig.1.20

1

Figs.1.20   and    1.21:Let's  look at a solid card  projecting a shadow on a ramp.It is exactly the same process as before, only this time treat the card as two vertical sticks (that is,each one of the card's sides).
Regarding the two lines that represent both sides of the card's shadow,observe that if they are extended down in the direction of the light source,they eventually cross the light source's verical (here indicated as point K).
The next page shows a few more cases of shadows on ramps.

K

fig.1.21

A

K

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路017

1a and 2a as the projections of the sides of the card.

018路Shadows on Objects

Fig.1.24:  Again,here is a shadow interrupted by an inclined surface before it can reach the ground plane.
In this case,the shadow is cast by an object located to the side of the ramp and it is tackled the same way as it was on the previous pages 017-018.This is done by bringing the two sides of the object(or house-shaped card)down to the ground plane and then using those two points of contact(circled)and the base of the light source (a)to create the lines that literally wrap around the ramp (see the arrows),going allthe way back to the points of contact of the house-shaped card with the ramp.
As  expected,the  two  resulting  lines  on  the  ramp's surface converge to point Kon the vertical projection of the light source.
K

a

Fig.1.25:    Here  is  another  example  of  light  coming through a gap in a wall,and how it is projected onto another vertical wall(A)and the ground plane(B).

020路Shadows on Objects

Fig.1.28:  This next exercise could be applied to a doorway,a window or a fireplace.As usual,draw a guideline from the base of the light source,through point 1,and from the light source itself through point 2.They intersect at point 3.
When drawing the projected shadow of the top of the fireplace, at some point the right wall is hit.From there,connect it to the

Fig.1.30:  After completing the base,move on to the top cylin- der.Make sure to draw the cylinder all the way to the ground and then draw the shadow as if the bigger,wider base does not exist.Draw guidelines from the base of the light source tan- gent to either side of the ellipse(on the ground plane),creating points  1 and 2(circled).

Fig.1.29:   Here is yet another curved object casting a shadow. For this fountain-like piece it is done in two steps,starting with the base.Draw as many verticals as needed to properly represent the area of the cylinder on the shadow side.Find the shadow points of each of these鈥渟ticks鈥漚nd then connect them to obtain the desired shadow.

Project  points  1  and  2  upward.Where  those  lines  intersect the top of the cylinder,draw guidelines from the light source through them,all the way to the ground plane.
Finally draw verticals from points A and B upward,until they reach the top of the base at points S and T,then draw tangent lines to the bottom of the visible part of the thinner cylinder (see dotted lines).

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路021

Fig.1.31:  Let's project the shadow of an inclined plane (P)onto another inclined plane(Q),like the shadow of a rooftop onto another rooftop.
Same drill as the previous inclined planes:Extend the ramp on which the shadow will fall,down to the ground plane(points 1 and 2).
Next,draw a  line from the  base of the  light source(point A) through the base of the vertical whose shadow is to be cast

Fig.1.32:   For an archway in a thick wall,draw the shadows of both exterior surfaces of the arch,front and back.Where these two shadows overlap gives the shadow area for the full surface of the arch(shaded dark gray).
Inset:Notice the way these two shadows overlap in that particular crossing creates not a smooth curve but actually an angle.

D)."Wrap the line"around the object by heading vertically to point Eand then back down to point Cwhich is on the originaline A-D so that line C-E is the representation of C-D on the surface of the inclined plane where the shadow is needed
Point F,the intersection of line E-C and the line coming straight from the light source,is the key point fo the shadow to be drawn.

022路Shadows on Objects

What about the shadow projected on the inner wall of the arch?
Fg.1.33  (right):It  is  simple;use  the  same  system.From  the igrt source,project several specific points from the arch onto  teinner    wall.
Fg.1.34(below):The  light  source  intersects  the  front  wallf te arch at points  1-5,and  intersects the  inner wall at  points 13-5a.Connect those points to find the curve of the shadow's meshadows edge on the ground meet

Tearch is in total darkness.

Fig.1.35:    Now  the  light  source  is  coming  from  a  different  direction than in the other drawings.When key points for the  shadow's edge are on the curved area of the arch itself(point  F,as we will  eventually find  out),first  project  the  point  onto  the vertical wall  behindit  (point  AA),then  bring  it  up  to  the  surface of the arch following the process visualized here.This  is essentially the same process that is used for shadows on inclined planes:Find the key point on theflat surface and then project it to the object's surface.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路023

Fig.1.36:    To  get  the  appropriate  shadows for this  house,start with   the   eave(overhang).First,project   its   corner(point   A)verti- cally to the ground plane (point B).
Next,draw guidelines from the light source and its base through points A  and  B  respectively,onto  the  building's  facade,creating points  鈥渁a鈥漚nd  鈥渂b.鈥?

Point鈥渁a鈥漣s  the  projection  of  the  eave's  corner  on  the  facade. Draw a line from there to where the front corner meets the roof (point C),and then draw a parallel to the roof's edge from point 鈥渁a鈥漷o  the  opposite  corner,(point   D).These  two   lines(aa-Cand aa-D)define  the  eave's  shadow.

all the way  back  to  points  1a  and  2a,which  are  the  points  of
contact of vertical  lines  F-ff  and  G-gg,on the  rooftop  plane.

024路Shadows on Objects

Fig.1.38:   Now for a staircase.To determine the shadow of the bottom stair on the ground plane,start by finding the shadows of its two front edges or corners(labeled A and B)as though they were sticks.This finds  points  C  and  D.Connect  them  to  obtain the desired shadow.
Going one step up,this shadow is found the same way that has been  practiced  for  inclined  planes  or  elevated  planes.Start  at the foot of the light source and then 鈥渨rap鈥漷he line around the stair(see  points  1,2,3  and  5).
To find point 4,the corner of the shadow,draw a line from the light source through the top corner of the step(Point E).

fig.1.38

B

D	3
2	
4          5
A
(

Fig.1.39:   For the shadow cast  by the top step onto the  middle one,repeat  the  same"wrapping"exercise.However  in  this  case, the  middle  step  is  too  narrow  to  do  this.Therefore,extend  the width  of  the  middle  step  as  much  as  is  needed,(line  1-1a),in order to have the elements necessary to do the 鈥渨rapping.鈥?

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路025

026路Shadows on Objects

Here are two more examples of shadows cast by a locallight source.
Fig.1.40:   Here is a room where the light source is either on a stand or hanging from the ceiling.Some objects are on the floor; others are attached to the ceiling or the walls.
To deal with this scenario,project the light source onto every wall (creating points N,S,Eand W).These points will operate as the base of the light source,as seen inall of the previous examples, only this time they represent not only the vertical projection of  the light source,but also its horizontal projection.
Fig.1.41:   To find the shadow of a floating object with a light  source positioned above it,draw the projection of the object  onto the floor so that the whole thing can be treated as a full polyhedron of which the lower section will eventually be cut off
If the light source was located at a level lower than the box,do exactly the same thing but inverted,meaning the projection of the box would need to be found on the ceiling.

Fig.1.42: When the light source is at an 鈥渋mmeasurable鈥漝istance from the viewer,like the sun or the moon,the mechanics are essentially the same;the difference is that the projection of the light source on the ground(point A)is found on the horizon.
Observe how this works when looking toward the light source.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 027

Box
VP

fig.1.43

Shadows  VP

fig.1.44

Sun  Rays VP
028路Shadows   on   Objects

All   Shadows
VP

Sun  Rays VP
The  sun  and  the  moon  are  so  incredibly  distant  from Earth  (compared  to  a  lamp  shining  a  light  on  an  object)  that  sunbeams  and  moonbeams  are  considered  parallel for   our   construction   purposes.
Fig.1.43:    When  the  sun  or  moon  is  located  behind  the viewer,the  light  beams  and  the  shadows  follow  the  same direction.Because   the    light   rays    are   effectively    paral- lel  to  each  other,they  converge  straight  to  a  vanishing point,always  located  on  avertical  line  below  the  shadows' vanishing  point(for  the  first  lines,both  the  direction  of  the light and the inclination of the light rays will be eye balled).

Fig.1.44:     The  higher  the  light  source  is  in  the  sky,the greater   the    distance    between    the    shadows'vanishing point  on  the  horizon  and  the  sun  rays'vanishing  point underneath.This   also   effectively   shortens   the   shadows, as  is the case at  noon when the sun  is  high.
This  image  includes  the  shadow  behind  the  left  wall(in a lighter gray)to give a better understanding of how everything    is    connected.

Fig.1.45:    When  rays  of  sunlight  come  perfectly  from  the  side they appear parallel to each other and the direction of the shadow  on the ground plane is perfectly horizontal.
This cube  has  been  rendered  a  bit  translucently  to show  how the  shadow  works.

Fig.1.46:   Below  is  a  more  complex  case,also  with  sunlight coming  from  the  side.
Observe that line A-B is interrupted by a large,volumetric shape in the form of a box attached to the right of the main object.In this case,draw the entire line from point A to B as if no obstacle were  there,and  then  project  points  "A1"and鈥淏1鈥漷o  the  side  of the box on which the shadow will be projected(between points 鈥淎2鈥漚nd  "B2")following  the  wall's  vanishing  point.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 029

Fig.1.47:    A  cinematic  use  of  shadows,as  the bars above these gladiators'heads  project  dark diagonals  on  the walls  around  them,helping  to enhance a sense of tension in the scene.

030路Shadows    on Objects

Framed  Perspective  2  Marcos   Mateu-Mestre 路 031

J
fig.1.48

SH鈻砨ouS

iCYT
RAYS閮?

Fig.1.48:  In this figure observe that we had to includ the ceiling and the bars that eventually cast the shac ows on the two gladiators to know where everythin is and where it comes from at any given moment.

032路Shadows on Objects

fig.1.50

Fig.1.49: This figure is a view of one of the steps.Note we still have the  original sketch we are trying to adhere  	to.Remember,first there is the artis- tic view or vision,then we bring it into  'reality'through the use of the perspec-  	tive principles,modeled in this book.

Fig.1.50:  This is the original sketch  drawn   purely   by   intuition.Experi-  ence and practice will take you to the point where even a small thumbnail willfollow at least the basic rules of perspective quite reasonably.

Fig.1.51(below):     The choice of a Murmillohelmet  for  this  drawing,out of all the types of gladiator helmets  was motivated by its capabilityto cast incredibly  graphic  shadows  on  the fighter's torso.(Photo-based sketches are from the author's personal files.)

fig.1.51

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路033

fig.1.52

fig.1.53

Fig.1.52:    Technicalities   aside,directly   backlighting   a scene offers us the possibility of going very graphic and straight  forward,creating  clear  and  dramatic  shots  with the use of rimlights.

Fig.1.53(right):    This is a sketch for "The Passage Ahead"  illustration shown on the next page.See that we always have  to visualize the horizon and vanishing points,for both the  architectural elements as well as for the shadows themselves.

Fig.1.54(next      page):Setting up the light source behind the camera allows the characters,in this case,to stand out in a pool of light up against a dark backdrop.

034路Shadows on Objects

fig.1.54

Framed  Perspective  2路Marcos  Mateu-Mestre路035

036

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路037

All of the lessons of the previous chapters can be applied to drawing  the  human  figure,specifically  comparing  distances and    proportions,recognizing     negative    space,and    finding angles  of  inclination.
The first step in being able to draw a human body is to study  the bare minimum amount of anatomy to understand its general  structure.This structure  is  based on  bones  and  muscles that create shapes.
Fig.2.3: Thisillustration shows the basic bones that support the entire anatomy of the body,with their names listed on page 039.

038路Characters in Perspective

Figs.2.4   and   2.5: The  height  of an  average human body of rather athletic/heroic proportions is approximately 8 times the height of its own head.
Figs.2.6-2.9:     Observe  a  human  body  from  the  front,side  and  back;all  of  the  muscles  shown  make  three-dimensional sense.Their  names  are  numbered  and  listed  at  the  bottom of page 039.

fg.2.6                                                                  fig.2.7                                                  fig.2.8

2

26
.27
28
4
13
15
17
17
18
18
20
20路

32
32
33
31

10

26

27
28
29
13

33
34

10

A-Skull
B-Clavicle C-Scapula
D-Humerus   E-Sternum F-Spine
G-Radius   H-Hipbone J-Femur K-Patella
L-Tibia
M-Fibula
N-Tarsal bones
1-Sternocleidomastoid 2-Trapezius
3-Deltoid
4-Biceps

5-Brachialis anticus
6-Pronator teres
7-Supinator longus
8-Flexor carpi radialis
9-Extensor    carpi    radialis
10-Gastrocnemius(calf)
11-Tibialis anterior
12-Pectoralis     major
13-Latissimus dorsi
14-Serratus anterior
15-Serratus magnus
16-Rectus abdominis
17-External oblique
18-Gluteus medius
19-Tensor fasciae latae
21-Sartorius
22-Rectus femoris

23-Vastus      lateralis
24-Vastus      medialis     25-Patella(kneecap) 26-Infraspinatus
27-Teres minor
28-Teres    major
29-Triceps outer head 30-Triceps long head  31-Gracilis
32-Iliotibial tract
33-Biceps femoris
-- il
36-Extensor   carpi   radialis 37-Extensor digitorum	

fig.2.9

5.
4

brevis
38-Extensor carpi ulnaris 39-Extensor of the thumb 40-Flexor    carpi    ulnaris

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos   Mateu-Mestre 路039

It is important to understand the main differences between the general shapes of the male anatomy versus the female anatomy.Here are a number of indications that make that easier.

fig.2.10                                               fig.2.11

MALE IS OVERALL HEAVIER
AT THE TOP
FEMALES HAVE A NARROWER, LONGER NECK

LATISSIMUS DORSI MUSCLE
IS MORE APPARENT
BROADER CHEST AND
SHOULDERS
THINNER ARMS
THINNER WAIST
HIPS MORE SQUARED
TRAPEZE-LIKE HIPS

HIPS AND THIGHS
A BIT HEAVIER
蹇?

SLIGHTLY SQUARER
THIGH AREA

MORE TRIANGLE- SHAPED TORSO
fig.2.12
MILDERTRAPEZE- SHAPED,MORE
SQUARISH HIPS

MORE SQUARISH
THIGH AREA THAN IN FEMALES

SMALLER OVAL TORSO

fig.2.13

BIGGER,
ELONGATED OVAL HIP AND THIGH
AREA

040路Characters in Perspective

BROADER CHEST AND SHOULDER  AREA

THICKER WAIST

fig.2.14                                                                           fig.2.16

NARROWER
TORSO,NOT
COUNTING
BREASTS

GLUTEUS A
BIT MORE
ELONGATED LIKE AN INCLINED
OVAL

AND LEGS
fig.2.17                              fig.2.18

THICKER
THIGHS
AND LEGS

fig.2.15

GENERAL MALE SHAPES AND
VOLUMES

GENERALFEMALE SHAPES ANDVOLUMES(MOSTLY
BASED ONOVALS)

Fig   2.18: The  body  can  be divided  into  5  segments:the
3 at the top form a zigzag line and the 2 at the bottom form opposing  arcs.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos   Mateu-Mestre 路 041

Besides  dynamics,proportion,and   anatomy,it  is  important  to   understand  the   basic  volumes   contained  within  the   human  figure, these become key elements in determining the correct shapes,lighting and perspective to draw.

Fig.2.19:   A common height fora standing female figure is 鈥渆ight  heads,"meaning that total  height  equals the  height of the  head multiplied by eight.To start,divide a vertical line into eight equal parts.But  remember,each  body  type  is  different  and  the  height "in  heads"is  not  always  eight.

The mid-point of the figure's total height coincides with the area just above the crotch.
Fig.2.20:   Next,define   the   points   where   the   torso,hips,knees, ankles,shoulders,elbows,and     wrists     are.

Fig.2.21:  Define the volumes bordered by these body landmark so that the figure starts to take proper shape.
Fig.2.22:  Use a volume like this inverted teardrop shape(shade gray)to define the shape of the hips and thighs.
Fig.2.23:   It  is  time  to define the  legs and arms.
Fig.2.24:  ...and then to do the final render of the character.

fig.2.23                                                                    fig.2.24

鐜?

042路Characters  in  Perspective

Figs. 2.25-2.29: Here are more examples of the human  body represented as volumes in specific perspectives, which is the nitty-gritty of this chapter.Once the over- all proportions of a figure are understood,as well as  how its basic volumes fit within those proportions,it can be more easily rotated in space and represented from  different points of view.

fig.2.25
fig.2.26

fig.2.27

fig.2.29

fig.2.28

Remember to pay close attention to people and objects in ev- eryday life.Once the technical aspects discussed here are un- derstood it is important to continue to attend life-drawing class-  es as much as possible.It is very helpful to observe and draw  subjects from diferent angles as they  hold the same  pose.

Your understanding of depth and volume will increase,and you will start to create a visual archive in your memory,which in turn will aid your power of observation and improve your draw- ings.We live in a three-dimensional world and it is important to use this sense of space and volume in our work.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路043

fig.2.30

Figs.2.30    to    2.31:Remember always think not only dynamics, proportions   and   anatomy,buf  volume.Without a clear understand- ing of the volume of whatever you draw,the application of convincing anatomy,lighting and perspective will be incredibly difficult.

044路Characters in Perspective

fig.2.31

Always get the feel and the space right first.Put them down with  quick  and  convincing  brush  strokes,do  sketches.If you don't like them,throw them away.If you are unsure, put them in a drawer for a moment(you might love them a couple of days from now).Ifyou work digitally,flop the image horizontally,vertically,whatever gives a fresh impression of  the work.If you go traditional,look at it in a mirror.This is a quick  way  to  see  disproportions,imbalances,etc.quickly, so that you can correct them.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 045

fig.2.32

Figs.2.30-2.38:  Let's talk about dynamics.It is now time to

As mentioned earlier,there are three crucial concepts to keep in mind the moment you start to draw characters: perspective, dynamics,and   volume.
Whether within the confines of a specific environment,with its defined  perspective space and vanishing  points,or when the character is isolated from any of these circumstances,like a body foating in space,the figures always need to obey the basic rules ofperspective.A character has structural lines,or points that are aligned in such a way that they do in fact form lines,like the line

that goes from shoulder to shoulder,knee to knee,hip to hip,or the two points at either side of the base of the rib cage.These lines need to converge to their own vanishing point.
How exaggerated or dramatic the perspective looks depends again on whether a longer or a wide-angle lens is used.I recommend reserving the use of wide-angle lenses for the most dramatic moments within a story,whether they involve extreme action or extreme drama.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre路 047

Figs.2.39-2.43:       These   drawings   developed   as   follows: dynamic lines followed by a quick sketch over them to establish the general shapes and volumes,and finally a more formal,yet energetic  drawing.

fig.2.42

When establishing the  dynamics  of  a  drawing(either  from imagination or a live model)it is so easy to play it safe and to water things down  in the  process.Train yourself to  push shapes and dynamics;you can always pull back from there. Experience the joy of channeling and transforming all of your energies  into drawings on  paper.Have  a good time,erasers exist so no need to panic.

Eventually and naturally the tendency to "normalize"things takes over,to make them"more real."Remember the goal is to make the audience vibrate through what is on that piece of paper鈥攁 piece of paper that you as an artist have transformed into an experience.
So for now,while practicing,just go for it.

048路Characters in Perspective

Fig. 2.47: This is a straightforward example of action informed by a dynamic underlying structure.

Figs. 2.48-2.49:  Working the dynamics prior to drawing the character can give an interesting sense of vibration to a steady pose that other- wise could have felt a bit dead.As we can see in these images,working around the negative spaces is also a very useful way to make sense of the dynamics and proportions.(Also refer to figs.2.1 and 2.2 on page 036.)

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路049

fig.2.50                                                                                                                     Having  volume  and  depth  in  mind,which

fig.2.51

fig.2.52

When it comes to analyzing the work of  illustrators,graphic    novelists,storyboard  artists and the like,the question always is,  "How do they make every character still  	look like itself,regardless of the point of view or angle?"The answer is they always  imagine the subject in 3D.Even when they  draw it from one angle,they can already   picture it from another one to make sense  of it as a single character.
Agood sense of three-dimensionalitygoes a long way when itcomes to drawing.Abig  partof that comes from intense observation from people and other subjects in everyday  life,films,etc.and  practice.It  is  all  about  finding solutions to specificproblems.The mission is to put "reality"down on paper in the most convincing way possible.

050路Characters in Perspective

fig.2.53                                                                                               fig.2.54

鈶?

Figs.2.50-2.54:  More examples of figure drawings built from basic volumes,shapes and   geometric  forms.As   mentioned before,geometric bodies make a lot more sense when they are drawn as volumes that fit within a perspective space,with its horizon and vanishing points.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路051

Sometimes only by moving the camera around a bit we can get much more dynamic angles(compare with fig 2.48 two pages before).This can give us the opportunity to create interesting foreshortening that  immediately  establish  a  more  cinematic, geared to impact,new image.
Again to resolve this type of situation successfully we willfirst  make sure we understand the perspective space our character is moving within(fig 2.57,top right).

fig.2.57
L

Fig.2.57:  After that we will constantly work the body as masses of volume that can be next to one another or superimposed as they come closer to our eye(see how specifically the arm and hand have been worked out this way,with ellipses representing the volumes of arm,fore-  arm and hand,and all the anatomy within..
鈥?to then step it up to a final drawing(fig 2.59,  bottom right,as well as detail to the left)in which we  made sure lines are not just flat elements on paper  but the representation of the outlines within which the masses that make up the body are contained.

fig.2.58

fig.2.59

052路Characters in Perspective

Figs. 2.60 and 2.61: Imagine a card with four horizontal strips of different values (a,b,cand d),when this card is displayed vertical in front of our eyes we will see the height ofall stripes as high as they actually are.

The moment we tilt the card as seen in the second pose our perception  of  the  strips'height  willbe  different,as   if  all  of them  had  suddenly  shrunk.That's  what  happens  when we see objects in a foreshortened manner.

fig.2.62                                                                                                             fig.2.63

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路053

fig.2.66                             fig.2.67                            fig.2.68

Before going any further on integrating characters in actual perspective spaces,let me say that allof these theories must be complemented as much as possible with  a  good,persistent  routine  of  drawing  from  life, either with proper models or just spontaneous poses in the street,at the beach,or anywhere you can practice without annoying anyone.
Fig.2.66: Let's take a typical athletic figure,8 heads tall. First,it is important to understand the body in a simple upright position based on its proportions and volumes. Then envision the body and its parts as agroup.Imagine seeing it from various points of view,as might be required by a comic book panel.
Fig.2.67: Knowing and understanding the volumes that form the body of a character is essential.When creating a view of a three-dimensional body in perspective,there needs to be a very clear idea of the masses and volumes that compose the body(represented here by these very basic balloon shapes).
Fig.2.68:  The balloon shapes have been refined into more defined,box-like pieces.

The three principles of figure drawing are perspective, dynamics and volume.Here are the steps to draw a character stretched out and face up(figs.2.69-2.73).    First,draw  a  perspective  grid  that  will  contain  the character and that matches the surrounding environment; otherwise the character will not appear to belong in the image or panel.Do not,for now,limit the height of the space or box containing the character;have a sense of freedom this way and pay more attention to the body feeling correct as an overall volume.
Fig.2.69:  On the grid,draw a quick flat "blueprint"of the whole body.Draw the points of contact of the head (1),the butt(2)and the feet(3)on the grid according to the proportions already studied.Everything else in the drawing will need to fit in with these three key points
Fig.2.70:   Draw  the  head,torso  and  hips  in  volume, describing the curve seen in fig.2.18 on page 041.
Fig.2.71:  Draw the legs,again counting on the curved dynamics already mentioned.Do not exaggerate these curves;keep  them  graphic,but  reasonable.It  is  very important that structural lines like parallelsA-E converge to the same vanishing points as the perspective grid

054路Characters in Perspective

Figs.2.72:  At this point,complete rough ellipses were drawn around the body parts;complete in the sense that they can be seen all the way around,as if the body were transparent.There is a roundness,or somehow cylindrical nature,of all parts of a human body.
fig.2.72

Fig.2.73: These steps provide confidence in achieving a true three-dimensional look and feel.
Fig.2.74-2.77:This is anotherexample of the same process, with the character facing down...(notice the dynamic line in gray along the body's side in the final sketch).

fig.2.73

fig.2.74

KNEES
鍙?
ANKLES

KNEES

ANKLES

fig.2.75

fig.2.76

fig.2.77

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路055

Fig.2.78:    Something  to pay a lot of attention to when drawing characters  in a foreshortened  perspective  is the fact that  most of the time we view  other  people  in  an  upright,mostly  frontal, position.That  informs  our  most  common  understanding  of  how a human body looks.

Fig.2.79:    When  observing  a  person  from  an  unusual  point  of view,we  sometimes try to  see what we  鈥渒now鈥漣nstead  of what we  really  see.In  other  words,when  looking  at  a  foreshortened

character  our  brains  'see'a  more  elongated  one,as  though   it were  standing  up(as  it  is  a  more  usual  every  day  case).That is why it is so important to keep a strong sense of the body's perspective  matching  the  surrounding  environment.
Fig.2.80:      If   you  were  to  draw  a  model  stretched  out  in  front  of you,observe  that  the  totality  of  the  body  on  the  floor  is  a  lot  closer to  a  perfect  square  than  one  would  assume  after  a  quick  glance.

fig.2.78
RIB CAGE
CHEST
ABDOMEN                                                                                                                  fig.2.80

Fig.2.81:   In  the  same  way,wrestling  the  character  into a  point
of view  that  looks  more  familiar  and  somehow  more  鈥渃orrect鈥?can  end  up  disconnecting  it  from  its  surrounding  environment, like  in  this  drawing.

Fig.2.82:    This   character   is   drawn   in   a   perspective   that   matches the      environment.

fig.2.82

056路Characters in Perspective

fig.2.83

Figs.2.83-2.86:    Examples of developing poses within the context of a specific perspective grid.A box for each character provides the opportunity to adjust every structural line of the body within its space.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 057

fig.2.87

Fig.2.87:  When designing extreme perspectives like this down shot on acrowd,there are several options depending on the type of lens used.On this page the view is through a long lens,with a solid perspective grid as usual.
As has been discussed,using a long lens results in a compressed image where the distance between a character's head and the feet,relative to the distance from the character as a whole to the camera lens,is small.Therefore the distances between such head and feet appear minimized to the eye of the observer.
As a result,the size of a character's head appears not all tha different than the size of his shoes.
If a character was standing right on the vanishing point,that is,right on the line of sight,his head and feet would appear perfectly aligned,and all we would see is the top of the head and the shoulders.
Therefore,the closer a character gets to the vanishing point,the closer his head and feetappear to each other.The farther away  a character stands from the vanishing point,the more he orshe is seen from the side and the greater the distance appears to be between the head and the shoes.

058路Characters in Perspective

000                                       Fran dPerssostive 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路059

fig.2.88
O

Fig.2.88:   This scene is viewed through a fisheye lens.To maxi-
mize this effect there needs to be an area of the character really
close to the camera,like her elbow in this case.That is because
the moment the character starts walking into the distance and
away from the lens,the effect gets minimized very quickly and
the dynamics of this type of look diminishes quickly.

This is also a case where more than one connecting fisheye
perspective grid was used for the background,as was explained
on page 194,fig.10.21 in Framed Perspective.

060路Characters in Perspective

鈼?

鈼?

鍥?
1
1

0
鈼?
鈼?
鈼?
鈼?
FramedPerspective     2路DardsMateu-Meste

Pose 1

Pose 7

Pose 6

Pose 5

Pose 2

Pose 3
Pose 4

Fig. 2.89: To move characters around within a perspective setup, simply establish the size of the character with avertical,or height marker,at  a  specific  point  within  the  scene.Choose  the  one point that is key in the development of the scene to make sure the character works perfectly where it matters the most.From there,literally slide this height marker around using the neces- sary vanishing point,as seen in this example.

Fig.2.90:    When  moving  characters  around  the  same  floor plane,it is important to account for the unique peculiarities of each one.After establishing the standard height of a standard character with a vertical line,then adjust to the different poses: Pose 8 the character is jumping,pose 9 is sitting,pose 10 is walking,pose 11 is wearing high heels and the guy in pose 12 is a head taller than the rest.

Notice in poses 4and7 the characters are partly hidden byeither the floor(because of the upshot view in pose 4),or the railing(pose 7).
Also,when drawing characters of the same height on the same flat horizontal ground plane(as in poses 1 and 2)the horizon line always coincides with the body at exactly the same point(the crotch in this example).

fig.2.90

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路063

fig.2.91

Fig.2.91:   In this illustration,there was the need to get the size  of each character right depending on height,distance from the character to the camera,and placement of a character on more elevated ground.The size-relationship between people,houses and horses had to beestablished as well to make sure all these elements feel solidly placed on the general ground plane.
Fig.2.92: As part of the creative process,here is the first sketchl did for this piece.Although l kept the basic idea for the final illus- tration,I discarded this specific approach because the vanishing points are so close together that it gives the image a wide-angle lens feel that I did not want.

064路Characters in Perspective

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路065

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 067

fig.3.1                                                       fig.3.2                                                     fig.3.3

fig.3.4                                                       fig.3.5                                                    fig.3.6

fig.3.7

068路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.10

fig.3 .11

Figs.3.1-3.11 :This book has already covered shadows falling on objects,now let's study the effect of light on the human body,starting with the part most featured in illustration work of any nature:The head.
These illustrations use a geometrical simplification of the head,all the better for perceiving it as an object.Such simplification makes it easier to organize your views and thoughts on how to proceed.
The light source is located directly above each of the 11 poses of this head.

Figs.3.12-3.14:   The shapes in these 3 poses have been simpli- fied even more.
Drawing something is actually an exercise in translation.The drawing will never be"reality as-is,"but rather an interpretation of what is observed and is believed to be crucial to put down on paper to communicate this particular perception of reality.This can range anywhere from a photo-real attempt to an extremely stylized abstraction,and all the steps in between.
What ends upon paper is a fantasy.In order to achieve an effec- tive one that delivers what itneeds to,it is important to synthesize what is seen in the model,to 鈥渙wn and digest鈥漷he information extracted from the observation process that precedes the actual  moment of drawing.

So simplify and get as organized and structured as possible in the mind's eye before drawing lines or masses of black (again, refer my previous book Framed Ink). This willonly help you be  more assertive and specific from the moment pen touches paper.
From here,go as detailed or as economical as possible in the execution,but whichever it is it must be done in a knowledgeable and conscious manner.
The process of simplification indicated on this page will help you achieve better results.

fig.3.12                                               fig.3.13                                                    fig.3.14

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 069

Before tackling how light visuallyaffects the human body,  it is important to have an idea of what type of landscape or geography the human body has.Let's take a look at it,starting with the head.
Figs.3.15  and  3.16:Going from the  inside  out,these illustrations represent the skull 鈥?
Figs  3.21  and  3.22:...on   which  the   muscle  tissue is  attached.

fig.3.17

fig.3.18

Figs.3.19-3.22:    The dynamics of the head and face shapes have been extracted and represented in these 4  sketches.
Observing all four drawings,realize that there are obvi- ous similarities between the general dynamics ofall the shapes,the powerful impact of the eyeball area and the contour of the cheekbones,in general,giving a lot of character to a face and head.

070路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.23

fig.3.28

fig.3.24

fig.3.29

fig.3.25

fig.3.30

Figs.3.23-3.25:  Here are more examples of skull...
Figs.3.26   and   3.27:...and   muscle   tissue,as   seen   from
different   angles.

Figs.3.28-3.30,3.31-3.32:    These sketches show the dynamic lines that better describe the construction of these pieces and are those to which close attention should be given.Once the basics are right,then build a believable structure around them.

fig.3.26

Observe on the following pages how all of this can be applied to
lighting solutions.

fig.3.27
fig.3.32

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路071

fig.3.36

fig.3.37

Lighting  a  face  from  directly  above  the  head  usually  results  in very   dramatic   lighting,especially   when    using   black   and   white, which  pushes  the  contrast  to  the  very  limit.
Fig.3.34  and  3.35: The head made of flat planes shows a few
shades  of  gray.
Fig.3.36:  What happens when this sense of volume is applied to the head and only black and white is used?Depending
on  the  moment  in  the  story,some  details  of  the  character's  expression might need to be seen,so the solution is to throw abit  of light onto her eyes,just enough to see some detail.Otherwise, go for it and push the blacks like there is no tomorrow,use light  to make a statement,turn this head into a virtual skull f need be.

In cases like this,be carefulabout the shadows on the lower sides of the face and chin.It  is  a woman's face  and therefore these shadows should not look like a beard.One option is to add a bit of reflected light from below the face.
Fig.3.37:   Or push the blacks not only around her face and chin but  also  in  the  surrounding  space.Here,pretty  much  all  the blacks become one,as do the lit areas which now appear to be  floating in the dark.

072路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.39

fig.3.40

Fig.3.40:   This is a side view of the same lighting set-up from figs.3.36 and 3.37.This type of inking treatment for shadows is perfect for heavier,dramatic moments.
Fig.3.41: If that style is too heavy-handed for the story,the shadow area can be indicated with lines and then shaded with gray...
Fig.3.42:  ..or simply draw lines that define the contour of the
the reader's imagination tofill in the blanks and assume that is
where the shadow belongs.

fig.3.41

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 073

fig.3.43                                       fig.3.44                                          fig.3.45                                       fig.3.46

fig.3.47                                       fig.3.48                                          fig.3.49                                      fig.3.50

fig.3.51                                      fig.3.52                                           fig.3.53                                     fig.3.54

As seen in these turnarounds,it is important to pay attention and be consistent when drawing the same head from different points of view,while the light source remains constant.For this,the best approach is to start from reality-based images,like sketches from a model or photographs,and then make graphic statements

based on them,simplifying the shapes for a more direct,final look.When most of the face is in shadow,make a choice between  creating a solid gray that allows more of the facial expressions to be seen or simply to make a bold black and white statement.

074路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.55                                             fig.3.56                                              fig.3.57                                         fig.3.58

fig.3.59                                             fig.3.60                                             fig.3.61                                         fig.3.62

fig.3.63                                              fig.3.64                                            fig.3.65                                          fig.3.66

Lighting affects a whole location(see Framed Ink for the use of light in the composition of full images)but the examples on these two pages have been detached from their immediate surround- ings,for now,to focus exclusively on the heads themselves.

Turn the  page for examples of lighting that  include the values of  the  immediate  surrounding  environment.

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路075

fig.3.67

fig.3.70

fig.3.68

fig.3.71

fig.3.69

On the next three pages are some examples of how to tackle the inking of shadows on a character's head and face.
Figs.3.67-3.69:     Applying a rim of light on both sides of a head is a striking way to define the periphery or edges,making it the focus instead of the facial expression which is more commonly the center of attention (see fig 1.52 on page 034).
Three different solutions  have  been developed  here.In fig.3.67 the face's expression is more readable thanks to the use of a gray tone  in  the  central  area.Fig.3.68  uses  solid  black  ink  for the   central   area  with   an   overexposed(white)background,and fig.3.69 has a solid black background,which brings up the side rim lights to a more prominent level.

Fig.3.70:  Lighting a head,a body,ora location from below offers a  very unusual look at the object.Because light sources(sun,moon,  streetlight,ceiling lamp)are usually located above the subject,the viewer feels unsettled about the anomaly of the situation.Hence the abundant use of low-angle lighting in horror scenes.
Fig.3.71:  Amore graphic approach gives a rather spontaneous, hard-edged  and  chiseled  look.

076路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.72

Fig.3.72: Adding rim light to only one side of the face can provide a softer, mysterious,somehow more romantic look when combined with the use of gray on the face,making the drawing have a less harsh appearance.

fig.3.74

Fig.3.74:  Amerciless  blast  of  light from the top-front exposes the rugged texture of weathered skin.

fig.3.73

Fig.3.73:  A purely backlit silhouette helps  to  define  a  character  by  its unique contour or outline.

fig.3.75

Fig.3.75:  A top-light coming in from  one side creates this always-appeal- ing triangle of light on the opposite  side's  cheek.This  can  be  further  enhanced by a rim light,adding to the complexity of the image.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 077

fig.3.80

Fig.3.78:   Limiting the amount of surface exposed to the light source will do for a more minimalist approach..
Fig.3.79:  ..which can be pushed even further by crop- ping the image.
Fig.3.80:  Avoiding the use of shadows altogether can enhance intricate details,as is the case with this char- acter's ornamental headdress.

078路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.81

fig.3.83

fig.3.84

fig.3.82

Figs.3.81   and   3.82:Having access to a session with a live model gives the benefit of being able to move around and see how the same lighting set-up looks from different angles.

Figs.3.83  and  3.84: Although the sketches at the top of the page might appear more realistic in terms of the depiction of the light and shadows,it is usually recommendable to synthesize and simplify as much  as possible.Sometimes filling in dense black areas that are only semi-dark in the model reference can give the drawing a more graphic and dynamic feel that,especially in graphic novels,storyboards orany other visual narrative situation,plays better in terms of a"quick read."Besides,the more one tries to get into detail and be more realistic,the easier it is to get too complicated and lose track of the originally intended expression of the drawing.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路079

fig.3.85                                                                                                    fig.3.86

Figs.3.85-3.88:    Here are various close-up views of rendering and inking samples that deal with light and shadows鈥攕ome tighter,some   looser.
Needless to say each of us  has a  particular view,idea and personality that influences allof our work.There are as many possibilities and ways of doing this as artists in the world.This is just a suggestion of how to use ink in a way that not only describes masses of light and dark,but also helps define volume, texture and surface direction.

fig.3.88
fig.3.87

080路Shadows on Characters

Let's not forget that when shading or inking a character,
it usually exists within an environment.
Applying shadows provides an opportunity to link both character and landscape and to treat everything as one single image;as explained in detail in Framed Ink.

fig.3.91

fig.3.92

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路081

Figs.3.93-3.95:    Regarding the effect of light on the human body, first take into account the bulk of the main shapes and volumes that constitute the body,and study the planes that these shapes form.By simplifying the intricacies of the anatomy,it is easier to understand  how  light  impacts  them,reflecting  off  the  brightest areas and keeping others in shadow,depending on the position of the  body  and  the  direction  of the  light  source.In  the  above examples,the  subjects  are  top-lit.

shadows  on  lower  surfaces  in  the  process(chin  on  chest)while other  areas  are  left  in  shadow  (under  the  arms  and  legs).
Fig.3.97:   The light source is still above the subject but is now slightly behind him,tilting forward.Most of his front is in shadow. The surfaces hit by light are the top of the head,shoulder,knee area of the  right  leg and the top of the feet(see also the  little mannequin  at  bottom).

The next pages show examples of how light behaves on male and female  bodies  while  hitting  them  from  different  directions. The  position  and  tilt   of  the  light  source  is  indicated  by  the cylindrical    arrows.
Fig.3.96:   Light hits the subject from above and slightly from the front.It is always important to keep in mind a three-dimensional idea of the subject.In the little mannequin figure at the bottom, see how some planes get hit directly by light,sometimes casting

Fig.3.98:   The light is from the side,slightly from above and in front.Roughly,her  left  side  isiluminated  and  her  right  side  is in shadow.For this type of work the details need to be correct (although  graphic!)based  on  observation  of  reality,live  models, photographic reference or all of the above.
The  shadow  side  can  always  be  treated  as  solid  black(more dramatic)or  a  lighter  shade  of  gray(bottom).

082路Shadows on Characters

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路083

MORE  STANDARD  LIGHTING  POSES

Figs.3.99  and  3.100 receivetop light from afrontal,diagonal direc- tion.The planes lit are similar to fig.3.98,but this time at a higher angle.Sill,one of the sides of the characteri leftin shadow.

084路Shadows on Characters

Fig.3.101:    Also  getting   hit  with  frontal,diagonal  top   light,but because  of  the  camera's  point  of  view,the  character  appears slightly   backlit.

fig.3.102                                                          fig.3.103                                                                             fig.3.104

Fig.3.102:   Sometimes adding a slight sense of reflected light, or rim light,between the shadow area and the outline of the character provides the piece with a certain sense of air instead of a drier,heavier look.
Fig.3.103: Also as a suggestion,when there are big heavy areas of dark,either go solid on the blacks or brush them ina way that keeps some of the white bleeding through,offering a some- how more casual,vibrant look.Always follow the direction of the muscles and the body surface to enhance the three-dimension- ality of the figure.
Fig.3.104:  Let's not forget that the subject's shadows can play an integral part of the darks of the full image,eliminating the outlines of the drawing altogether in the process,as explained in fulldetail in Framed Ink.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 085

Our  checklist:
-understanding the volume and the space
-understanding the anatomy
-committing to a light source location
-rendering

Understanding  the  volume,structure  and  space.  Based on the figure's planes create a basic place- ment for the lights and the shadows consistent with the light source's location.

fig.3.106

Understanding the anatomy

In the smallinsert (left),
think in terms of dynamics.

086路Shadows on Characters

Fig.3.108:  Commit to a  light source location and then  render.

fig.3 .107

fig.3.108

Fig.3.110:  Being clear about all these steps in our process will immediately multiply our chances of successfully moving the light source around and create new visual takes on our subject.

fig.3.110

Figs.3.107 and 3.108:  Inking and rendering options.
When rendering a general or  more distant view of a subject  we can use a more dynamic, somehow    rougher,approach. As we get closer to the subject  a more detailed take will usually  become a better solution.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路087

Up until now,we have discussed anatomy and lighting,the sense of dynamics,structure and perspective with a strong sense of proportion.After  absorbing  and  practicing  all  of  these,after observing reality a thousand times and doing sketches with live models in the studio and in the streets,studying photographs and developing a solid understanding ofthe volume and three-dimen- sionality of things,go ahead and use some artistic license,stylize the characters and make it work for the stories you want to tell.
As seen on this page,it is good to let the brushes be a bit loose,not so beholden to reality but rather making an artistic interpretation of it,sometimes exaggerating the anatomy more than it would ever appear on a real body,helping to accentuate the shapes and dynamics(fig.3.111 ),or simplifying the shapes and the way light works on them by having a quick and graphic understanding of it.
In fig.3.115 the shadow of the character's right arm on his hip area helps bring distance,volume and space to this pose in a fast way.Shadow accents under his left arm and on the legs get the job done right(see also fig.3.114)

fig.3.112                                                                              fig.3.113

fig.3.115

fig.3.114

088路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.117

fig.3.116

fig.3.118

Another    example    of    working    with    dynamics,structure, perspective and a simple lighting set-up that helps accentu- ate a sense of volume.
Fig.3.116 and  3.117: It is crucial that the perspective is worked out early on by creating areas of volume that indicate angle, depth and proportion.
Fig.3.118  and  3.119:Keep these fundamentals in mind when imagining where to position the light source and how this is going to cast shadows on areas of the body itself.Work out the areas of shadow very plainly and simply,and then add the right amount of anatomical detail.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 089

fig.3.121

fig.3.120

Figs.3.120-3.122:   Different ways to tackle line,shape and texture.

fig.3.122

090路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.124

fig.3.125

fig.3.123

fig.3.126

Figs.3.123-3.126:    A  drawing  that,although  it  begins  from  an  understanding  of  space,volume. dynamics and anatomy,ends up as a loose and fre interpretationofitalin order to achieve a more expressive fel,rather than a naturalistic and accurate one.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路091

Figs.3.127-3.133:    Here  are  some  igures that are  more action-oriented.The starting "mannequin"has been simplified by making its   planes  structure   boxier  than   before. Whether using a model or not,it is important to be aware of the planes that configure the character,and how each plane is exposed to the light or faces away from it.
Starting off this way helps to keep the whole process graphic.Even if the end result is very detailed and realistic,the audience still relies on  the  initial  quick  read.This  step  settles the essential basics of the work and adds readability and believability.

092路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.131

fig.3.130

fig.3.133

fig.3.132

Once the pose is understood from this essential, minimalistic   approach,take   it   one   step   further and apply something closer to the final anatomy, as seen on the next pages, figs.3.134-3.140.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路093

fig.3.136

094路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.138
fig.3.137

fig.3.140

fig.3.139

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 095

Figs.3.141-3.143: Once the subject's basic  volumes,anatomy and how light affects all of these are worked out and understood,it is time to tackle the final pass.
As  with  all  works  from  the  imagination, add a sense of grace by controlling how  the  ink  moves  on  the  surface.Combine strong,solid   and   graphic   blacks   with more   illuminated   (and   therefore   more rendered)medium  areas,as  well  as  pure white,strong   lights.
Personal    note:When    inking,I    always tackle   contour   lines   and   shadowlight blocks as one.I never draw an outline to then  'fill  it  in'with  shadows.To  me,this would almost always head for a somehow stiff or less than naturalistic result.

fig.3.142

096路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.145

fig.3.147

fig.3.146

Figs.3.144-3.147:     In  the medium-tone(gray)areas
a    somewhat    calligraphic  quality  can  develop  based  on how the brush or pen is  used.In  fact,as  a  warm-up  I like to write random words,  in both lower and uppercase, on another  piece of paper  before getting started on the  drawing.This  gives  me  the  freshness that I need.

While using the pen in this  calligraphic  manner,follow  the  volumes,shapes  and forms of the body and each  one  of  the   muscles,and try to put them all together  with a simple and graphic  approach.Too much detail or  rendering  at  this  point  can   lead  to   paying  too  much attention to the small areas,instead   of   having the big picture in mind.
Remember   to   draw   the
body within a geographical
context;it   is   not   just   a
bunch   of   muscles   and
details put together.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路097

fig.3.148

Fig.3.148:   Start with a dy- namic yet minimalist concept of shapes and balance.
Figs.3.149-3.150:  Move on  to shape-oriented lines that\ begin to augment the motion  and balance with a sense of  body structure.
Fig.3.151:   Draw the  body as planes,thinking about the next lighting step.
Fig.3.152:    Locate the light source,which   then   deter- mines where the highlights and shadows should be.
Fig.3.153:    Ready  for  the final     render.

fig.3.151

fig.3.149                                                                                    fig.3.150

In a nutshell,first understand the
dynamics  and  proportions,then
volume and planes.Position the
light source and then use logic
when it comes time to draw the
final  shadows.

When you do the final pass,do it like you are not worried about it,in  fact鈥攄o not worry about it.Keep  it fresh and loose.If you don't like it,throw it away or use the first version as an underlay sketch.  Enjoy the process.

fig.3.152                                                  fig.3.153

098路Shadows on Characters

fig.3 .154

fig.3.155

fig.3.156

Figs.3.154-3.156:  Once the direction of the light source is estab- lished(represented by the big arrow)having a three-dimensional understanding of the figure,and being able to picture or imagine that figure from diferent points of view than the one represented in the final drawing,helps with understanding what planes will be hit by light (indicated by the arrows)and which ones are left in the dark(within the thicker black lines).

fig.3.157

Fig.3.157: Again,imagine the sub-
ject as a three-dimensional,volu-                                                                                                                             fig.3.158
metric figure from start to finish.This is the only way to understand its per- spective,anatomy and lighting well enough to execute itconvincingly.
Fig.3.158:    Define the shapes better  and  be  more  particular about proper anatomy.
Fig.3.159:  Understand the final shape by putting the main mus- cular shapes in place,those that best  define  the  body  and  the action being performed.

fig.3.159

100路Shadows on Characters

fig.3.160

In  order  to  perform  this  step  properly,it  is very useful to practice by making preliminary sketches before tackling the final version.

fig.3.162

Fig.3.160:   Final renderings can be more orless real- istic,detailed,loose,dynamic.An  action  moment  like this is always better expressed with some looseness in the execution.The more dynamic each brushstroke is,the more dynamic the end result will be.

fig.3.161

Fig.3.161:   Pay attention to the
core shadows and the reflected
light in the other shadow areas.
The subtle use of these gives a
more realistic look.
Important:Try  to   keep   a   nice balance   between   solid   black shadows(more        predominant in  my  style)and  line-rendered, bounced-light      shadows.Doing so  provides  an  overall  graphic yet rich image.

LIGHT.

SHADOW
CORE
SHADOw -
REFLECTED LIGHT

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos    Mateu-Mestre 路 101

102

fig.4.1

fig.4.2

Figs.4.1-4.3:   In most cases it works best to start drawing the character's body,then    鈥渃lothe    it    up鈥漵o    that everything  sits  on  a  solid  structure and therefore makes sense.
Take  extra  care  when  the  clothing is  especially  loose  and  stylized.Still draw    the    basic    substructure,but when dressing it up try not to get too attached to the nuances and shapes of   the    body    underneath,as   that  might  bring down the energy of the more graphic type of clothing that a particular illustration needs.

fig.4.3

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路103

Figs.4.4-4.6:     The  possibilities  are endless depending on the type of fabric, how thick or thin it is and how tight or loose it fits.Here are the basic ways clothing behaves on a human body in its more common,regular poses.
Unless  the  clothing  is  very  loose, like  Roman  togas  or  Renaissance  costumes,there are a limited number  of basic ways to represent folds and draping to make it look and feel realistic, believable and convincing.
These basics not only describe and define the clothing on a moving body but also help to inform the audience about the dynamics of the character.

Figs.4.7-4.8: Before going any further, remember  that  all  of  the  upcoming examples    have   three-dimensional volumes as their basis.Always imagine the body being composed of cylinders	and  spheres,no  matter  the  point  of view.Then add clothing and describe its folds as it wraps around these basic volumetric shapes.

104路Clothing the Characters

fig.4.10

fig.4.9

Figs.4.9-4.11:Fabric folds on the upper body,whether  the  arm  is  stretched forward or backward,usually originate from the armpits;on the legs the folds extend from the bottom of the butt to the knees and roughly from the kneecap to the back of the ankles when the leg moves forward.
When the leg stretches backward the folds mainly extend from the front of the hip to the back of the ankle.

fig.4.11

Fig.4.12:     As  this  insert  illustrates, always  keep  in  mind the volumetric
view,then    emphasize    this    three- dimensionality by the way clothes wrap and fold around it.

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路105

106路Clothing the Characters

fig.4.24

fig.4.20

fig.4.22

fig.4.23

fig.4.25

fig.4.21

Figs.4.20-4.22: (The 3 larger illustra- tions)Folds help define not only volume but also dynamics,especially in action poses.Minimizing the use of folds by simplifying the lines that represent them can communicate a more subdued,qui- et situation.A more dynamic feel can be created by rendering folds in a more de- tailed,somehow explosive way,empha- sizing them by making them an obvious, prominent part of the drawing.
Figs.4.23-4.25:   (The  3  smaller  il- lustrations)The  thumbnails  accom- panying each pose explain the basic dynamics of the folds,as seen from three basic angles.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路107

fig.4.26

fig.4.27

fig.4.28

fig.4.29
灏慥

灏?

fig.4.30

Figs.4.26-4.29:     (everything   except inset).Here   are   various   examples of cloth reacting to different motions and dynamics.The areas where folds emanate   from(or   point   toward)are shaded gray.
Figs.4.30:    (inset)The   detail  of  the martial  artist  shows  how  folds  help to indicate changes in the planes of a body's structure(gray blocks).Observe that  where  one  plane  connects  to another,so  do  the  folds  that  wrap around her body.

108路Clothing the Characters

fig.4.31
fig.4.32

Figs.4.31-4.33:    When  observing  a live model,take care not to draw every  visible detail.Instead,choose carefully  so  that  the  folds  define  the  shape  volume and dynamics of the character. Keep  the  drawing  as  graphic  as  possible to create a 鈥渜uick read鈥漺hich  helps to deliver the message rather  than causing confusion.

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 109

fig.4.34

fig.4.35

Figs.4.34-4.39:     When   inking,
shadows can be applied eitheras
solid blocks or by first defining the
core shadow and then the area
the use of parallel lines,the shape
and dynamics of the body (arrows
indicate light direction).

fig.4.36

110路Clothing the Characters

fig.4.37

fig.4.38

fig.4.39

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre路111

Figs.4.40-4.42:   Here are some examples of how clothing folds help to emphasize the sense of volume of the subjects in a finished illustration.The direction of the brush strokes follows the direction of the folds and helps to establish the shape of the volume (arm, leg,etc.)that the clothing is wrapped around.

fig.4.42

Fig.4.43:   All of these principles can  be confirmed on a daily basis through  observation,photo   reference,and   a lot of practice drawing life models.

fig.4.43

Continue   to   practice   drawing   the basic graphic shapes that,depending on  the  pose,determine  the  volume and structure of your characters in a clear but stylized way.
Take advantage of all of these amaz- ing reenactment fairs and festivals by visiting them with your camera and building your own library of reference  materials that you can then observe, study and copy.

fig.4.44

Copying photographic images helps to create a habit and improves hand-eye coordination (see fig 5.1,page 114)so that ultimately when you are drawing from your imagination the clothing will look more believable and realistic.
Fig.4.44:    This is the original small sketch,from    imagination,on    which the larger illustration was based.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre路 113

fig.5.1
114

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos   Mateu-Mestre 路 115

The  artwork  in  this  chapter  was  created  directly  from  photographs to show how my mental process works in real- time and how l see and translate real-life elements into hand- drawn graphic statements.In order to keep an organic yet  properly structured feel,I drew most lines freehand but used a ruler for a few essential lines to anchor the whole look in a  more solid place within a general sense of spontaneity.

Fig.5.  3:Adding  textural  lines on the left  wall  helps  to  establish  a  better sense  of  perspective,structure  and depth.Make   sure   to   work   rom   a good  perspective  grid,otherwise  the final  result  willbe  disorganized  and contrary to what is needed.

Although details like the baby strollers on the left can add a lot of potential  character  to  a  scene,in  this  case  they  became  visually confusing  and  did  not  help  to  define  the  corner  of  the  alley.
Emphasizing the blacks in the trees behind the house (at  top)made the whole house pop a lot more,framing the roof's silhouette especially well.

fig.5.4

Fig.5.4:     The  shadows  of  the  window frames  on  the  curtains  help  define  the volumes of the folds in a quick,effective and graphic manner.

fig.5.5

Fig.5.5:    The  windows  on  the  right  side of  the  facade  have  been  simplified,the curtains    eliminated,to    take    advantage of the  sharp  contrast  between  the  white frames and the dark interior.
Similar to the dark mass of trees behind the rooftop,always look for opportunities to use ink in a daring manner.

116路Rendering:Thought Process &Execution

fig,5.6

fig.5.7

Fig.   5.7:As    seen    through    the windows of the van,the dark interiors of  the  house  and  the  van  seem foggier and somehow lighter.Using a quick line shadow of that interior鈥?as opposed to solid black鈥攄oes a better job at describing that.

fig.5.8
Figs.5.8:   Taking care to throw a bit of light at the top of the tire helps to establish a sense of volume that a solid black tire would not explain so well.

fig.5.9

Figs.5.9:      The  same  applies  to  the hedges  and  ivy  at  the  right.Using  an overall black ink frames the image well, but leaving lighter areas helps to describe the volume,and a proper textural use of the pen or brush describes the shapes of  leaves  and  flowers  in  a  somehow abstract but effective way.

Framed Perspective 2路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 117

Compositionally,I   changed   a   few   things   from   the   live reference.Mainly,I  removed  some  of  the  trees  that  were partially covering the city hal's dome,to make a more clear image overall,especially since those trees are pretty close to the center of the drawing.Plus,it feels good to celebrate such a beautiful building.For added clarity l eliminated some signage and the canopy at the entrance of the medium-sized building center-left.Lastly,the skyscraper was moved further  right so as not to be perfectly centered behind a tree.

For  the  inking   I  threw  some(nearly)solid  blacks  on  te shadow sides of the main buildings for a graphic approac    making sure to keep some brief areas of white to break te severity and coldness of a purely solid black shape(amate of style really).

fig.5.11

Fig.5.11:    The  tree  branches  and leaves in front of these windows(street level,lef)have  been eliminated from the original image to clarify the area and give it a more graphic look.

fig.5.12

Fig.5.12 :When drawing parall lines  in Photoshop I prefer to give them a  freehand feel.To do this,draw several short freehand parallels,select them  all as a group and transform/stretch  them.This  eliminates  most  of  their  potentally   wobbly   quality,as   any  shake in the line gets stretched out  and therefore watered down.

fig.513

Fig.5.13:  When a detailed drawing
needs to be rendered white-on-black
it is better to draw white on a biack
background then to try to ink the dark
background around the white areas.

118 路Rendering:Thought Process &Execution

fig.5.15

Fig.5.15:    Solid  black  is  rendered here with  thick  black  brushstrokes while leaving a few gaps to avoid a cold,uninspiring   look.

fig.5.16

Fig.5.16:  Sometimes an interesting, preciously    ornate    building    such as   this   one   is   better   rendered accordingly,while staying within the general style of the rest of the panel.

fig.5.17

Fig.5.17:   To  render the mass of a treetop,it  is  generally  advisable  to go  at  it  by  roughly  describing  the shapes  of  the  leaves  in  a  loose, abstract    way    rather    than    just applying a black mass.

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre路119

Fig.5.18:    Here is an opportunity to frame a nice structure with the darker shapes of the trees around it,with the light source shining at an angle that helps define the volume of the rooftops and the details on both sides of the facade.As part

of the overall look I reduced the angle of the sidewalk in the foreground,making it more horizontal.Otherwise it might give the feeling of a somewhat distorted perspective of the road.

Fig.5.19:   Creating  new  bushes  in the foreground (left)helps focus the view more on the house and makes that   corner   of   the   image   more visually interesting.
Some of the white details were added afterward to break the monotony of a  simple,solid,dark  shape.

Fig.5.20:   This  tallpalm  tree  helps emphasize  the  general  sense  of perspective,creating      an      arrow- shaped   overall   structure   for   the panel(with its widest side on the left, pointing  to  the  right)that  balances things out nicely.
Note how this tree is still connected to  the  rest  of  the  bushes.If  it  had been drawn as an isolated element it would get too much attention.

Fig.5.21:Sketchy     but     organized lines   on   the   rooftop   define   the texture of the tiles and the general perspective of the house.

120路Rendering:Thought Process &Execution

fig.5.23

Fig.5.23:     Although   the   shadow  areas  underneath  the  eaves  and the   umbrellas   could   have   been rendered solid black,using a thinner  brush and leaving scattered areas of white in a fresh,organic way brings an interesting sense of bounced or  reflected light that gives the feel of a  hot day in town.

fig.5.24

Fig.5.24:    I decided to give the big hedge at the right more variety of patterns   and   texture,still   keeping within     the     generally     graphic  blocky shape,so that  it would look more   interesting.

fig.5.25

Fig.5.25: Adding this tree to the very right  brings  home  the  arrowhead shape.It was not rendered white on black but the other way around,as it was defined with a thin-tipped brush.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos  Mateu-Mestre路121

Framed Perspective 2路 Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路 123

ILLUSTRATION                        DARK/LIGHT                               DYNAMICS                               PAGE    NUMBER/COMMENTS

			Page 30-31,fig.1.47:The fact
that the two gladiators have been
pushed to the right side of this
composition is simply due to the
fact that the basic idea was to show the shadowed patterns on the walls. Still,diagonals clearly dominate this composition for dramatic purposes.

			Page      34,fig.1.52:Flat   out
symmetrical image.Foreground
in black.Lighter tones for the more distant background.The rim lights
on both sides of the character
make him pop up.The envelope
is also lit as a main narrative point.

Page        35,fig.1.54:Almost
like a keyhole structure (very
appropriate for a conspiracy-
type shot!).The circle plus the two vertical characters overlapped on
it make the statement.

Page 58-59,fig.2.87:Darker dots
pattern on a lighter surface.Dynam- icallyeverything goes straight to the
single vanishing point.

Page 60-61,fig.2.88:Circles,
which always make a strong state-
ment,are the base for this one
together with the arrowhead-type
shape of her arm and weapon.

			Page 64-65,fig.2.91:Overall
horizontal flow in this image only broken/accentuated by the bigger
and vertical shape of the cowboy to the right.

124路Notes  on  Composition

ILLUSTRATION                        DARK/LIGHT                            DYNAMICS                          PAGE NUMBER/COMMENTS

Page      114,fig.5.1: A  light on dark statement  for  the   lady  in  costume to  make  an  entrance.We  establish the basic value structure,then elab-  orate the details within the lights and darks   making   the   image   richer.Her shadowed  side  brings  her  above  the lower,bright    ground    plane.

Page     117,fig.5.6: Basically   one small    rectangle    overlapping    a bigger  one.The   big   rectangle   (the house)includes    two    other    minor rectangles    in    it,the   windows.

Page      119,fig.5.14: An  abstract dance  of  squares,rectangles   and circles for this one.

Page     121,fig.5.22:Mild   perspec- tive     is     dominant,with     mostly straight   lines,topped   by   a   soft curve    emphasizing    the     more organic side of the image.

Framed Perspective 2 路Marcos Mateu-Mestre 路125

126

Framed    Perspective    2路Marcos    Mateu-Mestre路127

GLOSSARY
A
angle  of  inclination  -The angle between a line and the x-axis. This angle is always between 0 and 180 degrees and is measured counterclockwise from the part of the x-axis to the right of the line. auxiliary  vanishing  point  -That point toward which receding parallel lines appear to converge for secondary elements of an object or a scene,such as a ramp or a pitched roof.
B
background-  The part of a scene or picture that is farthest from the viewer.All background elements are there to offer information about the environment and frame the character.
baluster -An object or vertical member having a vaselike or turned outline.
bird's  eye  view-A view from a high angle as if seen by a bird in flight,often used in the making of blueprints,floor plans,and maps. blueprint-   A design plan or other technical drawing that shows how something will be made.
C
cantilever- Along projecting beam or girder that sticks out from a wall or other structure to support something above it.
center of vision -The precise point on which the eyes of the observer are focused.This point is at the end of the line of sight. centered composition -The centered way in which something is put together or arranged.
centerline- A real or imaginary line that is equidistant from the surface or sides of something.
central   vanishing   point-Apoint in the picture plane that is the intersection of the projections of a set of parallel lines in space onto the picture plane.
chiaroscuro -The distribution of light and shadow in an image. concentric-  Pertaining to the relationship between two different- sized circular,cylindrical,or spherical shapes when the smaller  one is exactly centered within the larger one,therefore having the same center.
cone  of  vision-The cone of vision is the visual region displayed by a drawing that relates to a person's normal vision without his/ her peripheral vision.
converge- As parallel lines recede into the distance,they appear to merge at a single point at a person's eye level(also known as the horizon line).
D
diagonal -A straight  line that  connects two  nonconsecutive vertices of a polygon.
diagonal vanishing point-A diagonal point where parallel lines appear to meet in the distance.
down shot-An elevated view from a high angle.
drawing through -Drawing through the form.Thinking about the 3D volume of the object and keeping the form in mind.

Dutch  angle-A type of camera shot where the camera is tited off to one side so that the shot is composed with vertical linesat an angle to the side of the frame.
E
ellipse- A circle in perspective.
eye level-Located exactly at the height of sight(or eyes)at any given time;thereforeit follows wherever the viewer goes.
F
facade -The front of a building.
focal length - The distance from the surface of a lens to the point of focus.
foreground-The part of a scene or picture that is nearest to and in front of the viewer.
foreshortening-   To shorten the lines of an object in a drawing or other representation to produce an illusion of projection or extension in space.
G
grid of squares -Evenly spaced verticals and horizontals
ground   plane-The theoretical horizontal plane receding from the picture plane to the horizon line.
H
horizon line -A horizontal line across a picture.Its placement defines the viewer's eye level.
horizon plane -Aplane that,going through the viewer's eyes, contains the line of sight.
L
left   vanishing   point-The spot on the horizon line to which the receding parallel lines diminish.In two-point perspective,the lem side has its own vanishing point.
line of sight -An  imaginary line that represents the straight direction in which the observer's eyes are looking.
long  lens-Alens with a long focal length.
M
mid-ground-    The  part  of  the  picture  that  is  between  the foreground and background.
N
nadir- The point located at the opposite end of a zenith,basically the center of the Earth.
O
observer-The character through whose eyes the scene is viewed. one-point   perspective-Arendition of an object with a principal face parallel to the picture plane.All horizontal lines parallel to the picture plane remain as is,andallother horizontal lines converge  to a preselected vanishing point.

opacity -The quality of a material that does not allow light to pass through it.
P
parallel-   Lines  or  planes that extend  in the same direction, everywhere equidistant.
pencil/thumb    -Simply  stretch  an arm  in the direction of the object being viewed and hold the pencil(usually vertically or  horizontally)to measure the distance between two key points. Hold the pencil in such away that its tip precisely overlaps one of  the key points and then slide a thumb along the pencil,stopping  right at the position of another key point.Stillholding the pencil  just so,move it until it is positioned over the other part of the model that is being compared to the first measurement.It will  become obvious which one is relatively longer or shorter and  by how much,providing a way to better estimate the proper  proportions of the model/scene.
peripheral vision-The act of seeing images that fallupon parts of the retina outside the macula lutea.Also known as indirect vision. perpendicular -Lines that are right angles(90-degree angles) to each other.
perspective  -A technique of depicting volumes and spatial relationships on a flat surface.
perspective    grid -A network of lines drawn to represent the perspective of a systematic network of lines on the ground or on X-Y-Z planes.
Photoshop- 2D Digital rendering software designed by Adobe Systems (www.adobe.com).
picture  plane   -The plane of a drawing that is in the extreme foreground of a picture,is coextensive with but not the same as the material surface of the work,is the point of visual contact between the viewer and the picture.
point of view -A position from which someone or something is observed.
polyhedron -A solid formed by plane faces. R
ramparts -Aprotective  barrier.
right  vanishing   point  -The spot on the horizon line to which the receding parallel lines diminish.In two-point perspective,the right side has its own vanishing point.
rise- The total height from the floor to the top of the last step.    run- The totallength ofall the steps projected on the ground plane.
S
spiral   composition    -Piecing  your  elements  together  and eliminating unwanted elements and chaos to create a spiral flow for the viewer to follow.
station  point  -The position of an observer that determines the perspective rendering of the objects orscene being represented in a drawing.

T
tangents -Meeting a curve or surface in a single point if a sufficiently smallinterval is considered.
three-point    perspective -Often used for buildings seen from  above(or below).In addition to the two vanishing points from each  wall,there is now one for how the vertical lines of the walls recede. tonal- Relating to color tones.The lightness or darkness of a color.  tread- The upper horizontal part of a step.
two-point   perspective   -Linear  perspective  in  which  parallel lines along the width and depth of an object are represented as meeting at two separate points on the horizon that are 90 degrees apart as measured from the common intersection of the lines of projection.
U
upshot -Seen from ground level or from the lowest level upwards. V
vanishing point-That point toward which receding parallel lines appear to converge.
vision- The perception of light,reflected off objects,that comes straight toward the eyes.
W
wide-angle lens-Literally includes awider view,from left to right and top to bottom,of the subject it points at.
wind   rose-Another  鈥減retend鈥漜ontact  lens  looked through at all times.It consists of four lines at different angles (vertical, horizontal,diagonal-right  and  diagonal-left)that  help  identify the angle of inclination for any given line being drawn,although the drawn line usually does not coincide exactly with any of the wind rose's lines.
Z
zenith- Apoint located at the topend of an imaginary line that is perpendicular to the ground plane,as if such a line were coming straight out from the center of the Earth,past its surface,and up.

INDEX
A
angle     022,043,046,050,052,071,079,084,089,107,120
angles of inclination 038
B
back-lighting 034
bounced or reflected light 121
C
calligraphic  097
circle  014,015,050,126    contour 070,073,077,096
converge 019,028,047,054,126,127 D
dynamic  048,049,052,055,071,079,087,098,101,107
dynamics  042,044,046,047,048,049,054,060,070,086,088, 089,091,098,104,107,108,109,110,124,125
E
eave 024,121
ellipse 015,021,050,052,055,126 F
fisheye lens 060
foreground 120,126,127 foreshortening 052,126
freehand 116,118 G
geometric bodies 051
graphic     033,034,050,054,074,076,079,082,088,092,096, 097,101,103,109,113,116,118,121
grid 012,015,054,057,058,060,116,126,127
ground plane 011,012,013,014,015,019,021,022,023,024, 025,029,063,064,126
guideline 013,014,021,024 H
horizon line 063,126
l
inclined 016,018,019,022,023,025,041     inking 073,076,080,081,087,096,110,118 inverted 026,042
L
lens 047,053,058,060,064,125,126,127 light source 086,087
light sources 011,076 line of sight 058,126
longer 040,047,053 M
mannequin 082,092

N
negative space  038,049 0
overexposed 076
P
parallel 012,024,028,029,054,110,118,126,127
perspective        013,020,033,042,043,044,047,051,052.054 056,058,063,088,089,100,116,120,124,125,126,127
perspective grid 012,015,054,057,058,060,116,127 Photoshop  118,127
planes  016,018,022,023,025,072,082,084,086,092,098 099,108,127
proportion      042,038,043,044,045,049,054,088,089,098 R
ramp 016,017,018,019,022,126  reflected light   072,085,101,121
render         029,042,090,096,097,098,101,106,107,118,119
121,127
rimlights  034
roof   022,024,116,120,126 S
silhouette 077,116,124,125 spatial 007,127
storyboards 079
structure 038,049,069,071,086,088,089,092,098,103,108 113,116,120
superimposed 052
T
tangent 021,127
three-dimensional    038,043,046,050,054,055,082,085,088 099,100,104
three-point perspective 020,127 tonal  124,127
translucent 020,029 turnarounds  074
U
underlay 098
V
vanishing  point       028,029,034,047,051,054,058,063,064 124,126,127
vibration  049
volume 024,041,042,043,044,046,047,048,050,051,052  054,072,080,082,086,088,089,091,096,097,098,104,107.
109,112,113,116,117,120,127
volumetric 020,029,100,104,105 W
wide-angle lens  047

Framed  Perspective  2路Marcos  Mateu-Mestre路131

I
ALSO    FROM    MARCOS    MATEU-MESTRE
A al al B bi b  C
Ci ci C C
Paperback:978-1933492-78-0
D d d:  0
E ei
el
F
fi
fc fc
fr
C
Paperback:978-1-624650-12-3
9

I
ir

To order additional copies of this book,and to view other  books  we  offer,please  visit:
www.designstudiopress.com

To  be  notified  of new  releases,special discounts,and    events,please sign up for our mailing list on our websit like our Facebook page,and follow us on Twitter:

For volume  purchases  and  resale  inquiries,please email: info@designstudiopress.com
tel  310.836.3116

designstudiolprEss
designstudiopress.com

Ic

n

Drawing the first line on a piece of paper is making a powerful choice.Marcos,using his
lifelong experience as a successful commercial artist  in  multiple  mediums-ilustration, comic  books,movie  design-is   offering  you  fantastic  tools   and   pointers  in  Framed
Perspective Vol.2,to help you make all the right choices.
-Pierre-Olivier Vincent
Production Designer,How to Train Your Dragon 2

MARCOS
MATEU-MESTRE
BESTSELLING AUTH0R OF

Building on the foundation established with  Framed  Perspective  Vol.1: Technical Perspective and Visual Storytelling,artist and best-selling author Marcos Mateu-Mestre delves deeper into particular elements that can make or break an illustration with Framed Perspective Vol.2:Technical Drawing for Shadows,Volume,and Characters.
Here  he  covers  such  challenging  tasks  as  projecting  shadows  in  proper perspective on various environments and depicting characters in perspective set in different situations-and makes them less daunting.You will lso learn how to effectively observe a model or object in order to extract just the right amount of information to then translate it into an impactful graphic and visual image,the goal of every visual storyteller.
Only in Framed Perspective Vol.2, will you find Mateu-Mestre's imaginative scenes explored in great detail,revealing invaluable drawing techniques-from  how to capture the essence of a character with one gestural line,to using
clothing   folds   to    further   define    the   shape    and   volume    of   a    character-to   help    you drastically improve your drawings.Itall depends on your perspective!

$24.95
ISBN     978-162465032-1
52495>

9781624650321
